---
layout: post
title:  "Temporal collage of thoughts from Berlin and Munich travel experience"
author: "Francisco Moreira de Azevedo"
---

<h3> What it feels to be like </h3>

I wish I was able to face you, the reader, to not be limited by this medium, to yank your arm by force and make you to look into my eyeballs and ****feel**** whatever Akira Kurosawa’s “Redbeard” means for me. To make you stay put until you surrender to the beauty of it. I admit defeat: I can’t tell if it’s my lack of writing ability or Kurosawa’s mastery that have compelled me to acknowledge that this piece will never do justice to the movie, the craft or the man behind them.

In a book about Wes Anderson’s “Isle of dogs” (”The Wes Anderson Collection: Isle of Dogs”), there is a two page homage of sorts to Kurosawa - to his movies but also his demeanour: he was a firm man that loved his craft  “a man more full, more whole, both more self-willed and more compassionate then most men are”, and I would add an artist at making *sincere* movies. Sincerity, authenticity, realness, that’s what I thought after seeing Redbeard - simple stories within a main branch, connecting, even if implicitly, honest questions we are faced with in our lives, which were relevant at the time (if not precocious) and still are today, such as:

What constitutes being a good human? What is disease, physical or psychological? How can an individual’s disease be a social problem? How can it be healed? What is privilege, how can it blind us? 

The way Kurosawa captures it made me think of David Foster Wallace’s (DFW) description of what really good art should be: “there’s a certain set of magical stuff that fiction can do for us […] one of them has to do with the sense of *********capturing********* what the world feels like to us […] it’s the stuff that’s about what it feels like to live. Instead of being a relief from what it feels like to live.” p.38-39 (Although you end up becoming yourself).

Oscar Wilde said that “All bad poetry springs from genuine feeling.”, which one could generalize to “All bad art is sincere”. There is a fine line between sincere and cringe worthy or lame art, a line which is a constant theme in DFW’s writing since he belonged to a generation embedded in postmodernism - with it’s deconstruction of grand narratives, subjectivity, self-reflexivity, a certain cynicism and ironical distancing - characteristics that were not shared with Kurosawa’s generation. With the lack of shared (religious) narratives that impose values, and the breaking down of truths previously viewed as objective, we were left to ourselves, individually, to construct the meaning and interpretation of the world. But what could potentially be constructive, seemed to Wallace to have never reached that point: postmodernism brought more of itself, it did not seem constitutive to the meaning-making we need to make sense of our lives. 

Thinking about Dostoevsky’s work, DFW said “he appears to possess degrees of passion, conviction, and engagement with deep moral issues that we - here, today [americans, late 1990] - cannot or do not permit ourselves” p271 to which he contrasted the US writing culture, which was not nihilistic per se, but rather suffering from a “congenital skepticism”. To DFW, being sincere in his timeline was - even more than potentially making bad art - to risk not being taken seriously, to be shrugged off with “a raised eyebrow and a very cool smile” p273 (”Consider the Lobster”). But Kurosawa, like Dostoevsky, was not yet in the postmodern zeitgeist, that’s why his movies give a specific shine of rawness. 

What DFW tried to capture in his fiction was a conjunction of both the modern and postmodern worlds: one both sincere and skeptic, raw and reflexive, to be fully open to the emotions of the scenes but critical of what they are portraying - a trend that developed into the late 00’s and 10’s of the 21st century where it “now seems to be a search for meaning while still holding onto the idea that there is no [single] truth” [https://www.metamodernism.com/2011/02/10/the-joke-that-wasnt-funny-anymore/](https://www.metamodernism.com/2011/02/10/the-joke-that-wasnt-funny-anymore/). This piece of writing is an attempt to view Kurosawa’s Redbeard under this lens, alternating perspectives midway.
